README.md, before:

# Label Printer

> :warning: `label-printer` is still under heavy development and is subject to frequent API changes


This package provides a TypeScript/JavaScript API to:

- **Build labels** in a printer-language-independent way
- **Generate printer commands** (currently TSPL focused)
- **Find and talk to printers**
  - **Browser**: via WebUSB
  - **Node.js**: via USB and **automatic network discovery** (TCP/9100)

## Installation

```bash
npm install label-printer
```

## Main exports

The library exposes three main areas:

- **Commands**: `import { commands } from "label-printer"`
- **Labels**: `import { labels } from "label-printer"`
- **Printers**: `import { printers } from "label-printer"`

## Runtime support (Browser vs Node)

### Browser

- Uses **WebUSB** to communicate with USB label printers.
- Typical entry point: `printers.PrinterService.requestPrinter()`.

### Node.js

- Supports USB printing (where supported by the `usb` dependency).
- Supports **network printing over TCP** (raw printing, usually port `9100`).
- Supports **automatic network discovery**:
  - First attempts Bonjour/mDNS discovery of printer-related services
  - If Bonjour yields no candidates, falls back to a conservative private-subnet scan
  - Every discovered candidate is **verified** by sending the TSPL identify command (`~!I`)

## Printer layer

### Discover printers

```ts
import { printers } from "label-printer"

const printersList = await printers.PrinterService.getPrinters()
if(printersList.length === 0) {
  throw new Error("No printers found")
}

const printer = printersList[0]
```

### Request a printer (browser-focused)

```ts
import { printers } from "label-printer"

const printer = await printers.PrinterService.requestPrinter()
if(!printer) throw new Error("No printer selected")
```

### Print or display a label

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

const label = new labels.Label(50, 25)
// 1 label, 3mm gap
await printer.print(label, 1, 3)
// or
await printer.display(label)

await printer.close()
```

### Connect directly (bypass discovery)

If you already know how to reach your printer (network address or USB identifiers), you can create a printer instance directly.

Auto-detect language (recommended default):

```ts
import { printers } from "label-printer"

const printer = await printers.PrinterService.connect({ network: { host: "192.168.100.31" } })
if(!printer) throw new Error("Printer not found or not supported")
```

Explicit TSPL (when you know it's a TSPL printer):

```ts
import { printers } from "label-printer"

const printer = await printers.PrinterService.connectTSPL({ network: { host: "192.168.100.31", port: 9100 } })
if(!printer) throw new Error("Not a TSPL printer")
```

USB (Node.js - filter without a prompt):

```ts
import { printers } from "label-printer"

const printer = await printers.PrinterService.connect({
  usb: { vendorId: 0x1234, productId: 0x5678, serialNumber: "ABC" }
})
if(!printer) throw new Error("Printer not found or not supported")
```

USB (Browser - shows a picker; you can optionally filter by `vendorId` / `productId`):

```ts
import { printers } from "label-printer"

const printer = await printers.PrinterService.connect({
  usb: { vendorId: 0x1234, productId: 0x5678 }
})
if(!printer) throw new Error("No printer selected")
```

## Device abstraction

Commands write to a transport-agnostic `Device` interface. This enables the same printer and label APIs to work over different transports.

- **USB** device implementation is internal to `USBUtils`.
- **Network** support uses a TCP implementation in Node.js.

## Label layer

The label layer provides a language-independent way to construct labels, which can then be rendered to commands for the chosen printer language.

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

const label = new labels.Label(50, 25)
// label.add(...fields)
```

## Supported languages

- [TSPL](documentations/TSPL.pdf)

## Fields

Fields are available from the package root export.

### Text

Create a text field at (`x`, `y`) in **dots**.

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

const label = new labels.Label(50, 25)

const text = new labels.Text("Hello", 20, 20, true)
text.setSingleLine(200)

label.add(text)
```

Text wrapping/clipping:

- `text.setSingleLine(width?)`
- `text.setMultiLine(width, height?)`

Formatted text (when `formatted = true`) supports basic tags:

- `<b>...</b>`: bold (uses weight `700`)
- `<i>...</i>`: italic
- `<u>...</u>`: underline
- `<s>...</s>`: strike

### Line

Draw a line between two points (values in **dots**).

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

label.add(new labels.Line({ x: 10, y: 10 }, { x: 300, y: 10 }, 3))
```

### Image

Draw a black/white bitmap image. You can either provide a bitmap-like object directly,
or use the async helper to load/convert an image.

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

const img = await labels.Image.create("./logo.png", 10, 60, 200)
label.add(img)
```

### BarCode

Draw a barcode (TSPL-backed). Values are in **dots**.

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

const barcode = new labels.BarCode("123456789", 20, 120, "CODE128", 80)
barcode.setHumanReadable("bottom")
barcode.setRotation(0)

label.add(barcode)
```

### QRCode

Draw a QR code.

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

label.add(new labels.QRCode("https://example.com", 20, 220, 6))
```

### Table

The `Table` field draws a grid and places text into each cell. It uses the existing `Text` field for cell contents and the existing `Line` field for the grid lines.

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

const label = new labels.Label(50, 25)

const table = new labels.Table(10, 10, [
  ["A1", "A2"],
  ["B1", "B2"],
], {
  size: { width: 200, height: 100 },
  columnWidths: [80, 120],
  rowHeights: [40, 60],
  lineThickness: 2,
  cellPadding: 4,
  formatted: false,
  font: { name: "default", size: 10 },
})

label.add(table)
```

Sizing rules:

- **If `size.width`/`size.height` are set**
  - Any unspecified row/column sizes share the remaining space equally.
  - Cell text is constrained to the cell content box and will wrap to multiple lines. If a row height is fixed, the text may be clipped once it reaches the height limit.
- **If table size is not set**
  - Unspecified row/column sizes are measured from their content.

## Command layer

The command layer is the lowest level and represents printer-language-specific commands.

Most users will not need this directly. It is primarily used internally by `Label` to generate
print/display command sequences.

## Public API summary

- **`Label`**
  - Construct labels and add fields
  - Generate language-specific print/display commands via printer layer
- **`PrinterService`**
  - `getPrinters()`
    - Browser: discovers accessible USB printers
    - Node: discovers USB printers + network printers (Bonjour/mDNS, then subnet scan fallback)
  - `requestPrinter()`
    - Browser: prompts user for a USB device
    - Node: selects first available USB device (may return `undefined`)
- **`Printer`**
  - `print(label, sets, gap, copiesPerSet?, direction?, mirror?, gapOffset?)`
  - `display(label, direction?, mirror?)`
  - `close()`

## Notes

### Useful units

- 1 pt = 1/72 inch
- 1 dot = 1 / dpi

### Fonts

There are two ways to use fonts:

1. Use printer built-in fonts (by using `name: "default"`)
2. Register and use custom fonts on a per-`Label` basis

#### Set a font on `Text` / `Table`

Fonts are configured using a `FontOption`:

```ts
text.setFont({ name: "default", size: 10 })
// or
text.setFont({ name: "MyFont", size: 18, weight: 700, style: "normal" })
```

- `size` is specified in **dots**.
- `weight` defaults to `400`.
- `style` defaults to `"normal"`.

#### Register a custom font on a `Label`

Registering fonts enables better text measurement (for wrapping) and ensures the font is uploaded
as part of the generated print/display command sequence.

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

const label = new labels.Label(50, 25)

await label.registerFont({
  name: "MyFont",
  data: await (await fetch("/fonts/MyFont-Regular.ttf")).arrayBuffer(),
  weight: 400,
  style: "normal",
})

await label.registerFont({
  name: "MyFont",
  data: await (await fetch("/fonts/MyFont-Bold.ttf")).arrayBuffer(),
  weight: 700,
  style: "normal",
})
```

Font notes:

- If a font is not working, make sure the extension is **TTF**.
- If you want bold text, register a `weight: 700` variant.
- When using formatted text (`<b>...</b>`), the library will request `weight: 700`.

# Update package

- Make changes on feature branch.
- Run `pnpm changeset` on feature branch to create change.
- Merge feature branch into main.
- Run `pnpm changeset version` on main to create an update with all the versions. 
- PR is automatically created on push, merge it to trigger publish
- Note: If there are unpublished changes on main and the release fails, it will be run again on the next push to main, no need to start again from the first step

Commit message:

Export PrinterStatus type and update README documentation

README.md, after:

# Label Printer

> :warning: `label-printer` is still under heavy development and is subject to frequent API changes


This package provides a TypeScript/JavaScript API to:

- **Build labels** in a printer-language-independent way
- **Generate printer commands** (currently TSPL focused)
- **Find and talk to printers**
  - **Browser**: via WebUSB
  - **Node.js**: via USB and **automatic network discovery** (TCP/9100)

## Installation

```bash
npm install label-printer
```

## Main exports

The library exposes three main areas:

- **Commands**: `import { commands } from "label-printer"`
- **Labels**: `import { labels } from "label-printer"`
- **Printers**: `import { printers } from "label-printer"`

## Runtime support (Browser vs Node)

### Browser

- Uses **WebUSB** to communicate with USB label printers.
- Typical entry point: `printers.PrinterService.requestPrinter()`.

### Node.js

- Supports USB printing (where supported by the `usb` dependency).
- Supports **network printing over TCP** (raw printing, usually port `9100`).
- Supports **automatic network discovery**:
  - First attempts Bonjour/mDNS discovery of printer-related services
  - If Bonjour yields no candidates, falls back to a conservative private-subnet scan
  - Every discovered candidate is **verified** by sending the TSPL identify command (`~!I`)

## Printer layer

### Discover printers

```ts
import { printers } from "label-printer"

const printersList = await printers.PrinterService.getPrinters()
if(printersList.length === 0) {
  throw new Error("No printers found")
}

const printer = printersList[0]
```

### Request a printer (browser-focused)

```ts
import { printers } from "label-printer"

const printer = await printers.PrinterService.requestPrinter()
if(!printer) throw new Error("No printer selected")
```

### Print or display a label

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

const label = new labels.Label(50, 25)
// 1 label, 3mm gap
await printer.print(label, 1, 3)
// or
await printer.display(label)

await printer.close()
```

### Connect directly (bypass discovery)

If you already know how to reach your printer (network address or USB identifiers), you can create a printer instance directly.

Auto-detect language (recommended default):

```ts
import { printers } from "label-printer"

const printer = await printers.PrinterService.connect({ network: { host: "192.168.100.31" } })
if(!printer) throw new Error("Printer not found or not supported")
```

Explicit TSPL (when you know it's a TSPL printer):

```ts
import { printers } from "label-printer"

const printer = await printers.PrinterService.connectTSPL({ network: { host: "192.168.100.31", port: 9100 } })
if(!printer) throw new Error("Not a TSPL printer")
```

USB (Node.js - filter without a prompt):

```ts
import { printers } from "label-printer"

const printer = await printers.PrinterService.connect({
  usb: { vendorId: 0x1234, productId: 0x5678, serialNumber: "ABC" }
})
if(!printer) throw new Error("Printer not found or not supported")
```

USB (Browser - shows a picker; you can optionally filter by `vendorId` / `productId`):

```ts
import { printers } from "label-printer"

const printer = await printers.PrinterService.connect({
  usb: { vendorId: 0x1234, productId: 0x5678 }
})
if(!printer) throw new Error("No printer selected")
```

## Device abstraction

Commands write to a transport-agnostic `Device` interface. This enables the same printer and label APIs to work over different transports.

- **USB** device implementation is internal to `USBUtils`.
- **Network** support uses a TCP implementation in Node.js.

## Label layer

The label layer provides a language-independent way to construct labels, which can then be rendered to commands for the chosen printer language.

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

const label = new labels.Label(50, 25)
// label.add(...fields)
```

## Supported languages

- [TSPL](documentations/TSPL.pdf)

## Fields

Fields are available from the package root export.

### Text

Create a text field at (`x`, `y`) in **dots**.

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

const label = new labels.Label(50, 25)

const text = new labels.Text("Hello", 20, 20, true)
text.setSingleLine(200)

label.add(text)
```

Text wrapping/clipping:

- `text.setSingleLine(width?)`
- `text.setMultiLine(width, height?)`

Formatted text (when `formatted = true`) supports basic tags:

- `<b>...</b>`: bold (uses weight `700`)
- `<i>...</i>`: italic
- `<u>...</u>`: underline
- `<s>...</s>`: strike

### Line

Draw a line between two points (values in **dots**).

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

label.add(new labels.Line({ x: 10, y: 10 }, { x: 300, y: 10 }, 3))
```

### Image

Draw a black/white bitmap image. You can either provide a bitmap-like object directly,
or use the async helper to load/convert an image.

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

const img = await labels.Image.create("./logo.png", 10, 60, 200)
label.add(img)
```

### BarCode

Draw a barcode (TSPL-backed). Values are in **dots**.

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

const barcode = new labels.BarCode("123456789", 20, 120, "CODE128", 80)
barcode.setHumanReadable("bottom")
barcode.setRotation(0)

label.add(barcode)
```

### QRCode

Draw a QR code.

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

label.add(new labels.QRCode("https://example.com", 20, 220, 6))
```

### Table

The `Table` field draws a grid and places text into each cell. It uses the existing `Text` field for cell contents and the existing `Line` field for the grid lines.

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

const label = new labels.Label(50, 25)

const table = new labels.Table(10, 10, [
  ["A1", "A2"],
  ["B1", "B2"],
], {
  size: { width: 200, height: 100 },
  columnWidths: [80, 120],
  rowHeights: [40, 60],
  lineThickness: 2,
  cellPadding: 4,
  formatted: false,
  font: { name: "default", size: 10 },
})

label.add(table)
```

Sizing rules:

- **If `size.width`/`size.height` are set**
  - Any unspecified row/column sizes share the remaining space equally.
  - Cell text is constrained to the cell content box and will wrap to multiple lines. If a row height is fixed, the text may be clipped once it reaches the height limit.
- **If table size is not set**
  - Unspecified row/column sizes are measured from their content.

## Command layer

The command layer is the lowest level and represents printer-language-specific commands.

Most users will not need this directly. It is primarily used internally by `Label` to generate
print/display command sequences.

## Public API summary

- **`Label`**
  - Construct labels and add fields
  - Generate language-specific print/display commands via printer layer
- **`PrinterService`**
  - `getPrinters()`
    - Browser: discovers accessible USB printers
    - Node: discovers USB printers + network printers (Bonjour/mDNS, then subnet scan fallback)
  - `requestPrinter()`
    - Browser: prompts user for a USB device
    - Node: selects first available USB device (may return `undefined`)
- **`Printer`**
  - `print(label, sets, gap, copiesPerSet?, direction?, mirror?, gapOffset?)`
  - `display(label, direction?, mirror?)`
  - `getModelname()`
  - `getStatus()`
  - `close()`

- **`PrinterStatus`**
  - String union of possible status values returned by `printer.getStatus()`.
  - Access via `printers.PrinterStatus`.

## Notes

### Useful units

- 1 pt = 1/72 inch
- 1 dot = 1 / dpi

### Fonts

There are two ways to use fonts:

1. Use printer built-in fonts (by using `name: "default"`)
2. Register and use custom fonts on a per-`Label` basis

#### Set a font on `Text` / `Table`

Fonts are configured using a `FontOption`:

```ts
text.setFont({ name: "default", size: 10 })
// or
text.setFont({ name: "MyFont", size: 18, weight: 700, style: "normal" })
```

- `size` is specified in **dots**.
- `weight` defaults to `400`.
- `style` defaults to `"normal"`.

#### Register a custom font on a `Label`

Registering fonts enables better text measurement (for wrapping) and ensures the font is uploaded
as part of the generated print/display command sequence.

```ts
import { labels } from "label-printer"

const label = new labels.Label(50, 25)

await label.registerFont({
  name: "MyFont",
  data: await (await fetch("/fonts/MyFont-Regular.ttf")).arrayBuffer(),
  weight: 400,
  style: "normal",
})

await label.registerFont({
  name: "MyFont",
  data: await (await fetch("/fonts/MyFont-Bold.ttf")).arrayBuffer(),
  weight: 700,
  style: "normal",
})
```

Font notes:

- If a font is not working, make sure the extension is **TTF**.
- If you want bold text, register a `weight: 700` variant.
- When using formatted text (`<b>...</b>`), the library will request `weight: 700`.

# Update package

- Make changes on feature branch.
- Run `pnpm changeset` on feature branch to create change.
- Merge feature branch into main.
- Changeset will create a PR, merge it to trigger publish
